JUDY WOODRUFF: Good
evening. I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: It's Election Day in
much of the country.
Voters pick new leaders and
decide on issues, from pot
legalization to LGBT rights.
GWEN IFILL: Also ahead this
Tuesday: pipeline politics. The
company behind the Keystone
XL pipeline asks to
hold off on a decision.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we talk with
the woman in charge of the
upcoming U.N. climate change
summit.
CHRISTIANA FIGUERES, Executive
Secretary, United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate
Change: The major, major shift
that we had between where we
were in Copenhagen to now
is that countries have
increasingly understood that
addressing climate change is not
just
a global issue. It's actually
also a national priority.
GWEN IFILL: Plus, could building
more dams be a solution for
drought-stricken California
farmers?
All that and more on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: The puzzle of what
brought down a Russian airliner
over Egypt remained far
from solved today. U.S.
officials said images shot from
space may contain clues to why
the
plane broke up on Saturday,
killing all 224 people on board.
Paul Davies of Independent
Television News reports on the
day's developments.
PAUL DAVIES: Stretcher bearers
formed a guard of honor as the
bodies recovered from the
wreckage in the Egyptian desert
finally completed their journey
home to Saint Petersburg.
This is a city in mourning. And
there are more painful days
ahead. Relatives have been
arriving at the morgue to give
DNA samples to help in the grim
process of identification.
Russian officials have been
giving a daily update on the
recovery operation and the
spread
of wreckage on the ground, but
still no hard information on
whether this was an act of
terrorism.
Bereaved families are having to
make due with rumors. The latest
clues are all unconfirmed.
Russian media is reporting that
unusual sounds were recorded by
the plane's black boxes.
American sources say their spy
satellites detected a strong
heat flash, which could
have been an on-board explosion,
and there are reports of
mysterious debris at the crash
site said not to be part of the
plane. It's hoped the
examination of flight recorders
due to start tonight could
turn rumors into answers.
All that's known at this stage
is that the Russian Airbus
appeared to break up in midair
after leaving the Egyptian Red
Sea resort of Sharm el-Sheikh,
and that all 224 on board
perished. Egyptian investigators
say they will solve this
mystery, but warn it could
be a long process.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In other news, in
Turkey today, a crackdown
intensified on alleged
supporters
of a major opposition leader.
Police arrested at least 44
people accused of ties to Muslim
cleric Fethullah Gulen,
who's in exile in the U.S. A
former police chief and three
state governors were among
those detained. The Turkish
government accuses Gulen of
running -- quote -- "a terrorist
group."
GWEN IFILL: China and Taiwan
plan a historic summit on
Saturday. They announced today
that
Chinese President Xi Jinping and
Taiwanese President Ma Ying-jeou
will meet Saturday
in Singapore. It's the first
such meeting since 1949, when
communists won China's civil
war.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The head of U.S.
Pacific forces played down
tensions with China today over
disputes in the South China Sea.
Last week, the U.S. Navy sent a
warship past Chinese-built
islands, through waters
that Beijing claims.
At a meeting there today,
Admiral Harry Harris said the
move wasn't meant as a threat.
But
a top Chinese general complained
that it soured relations.
GEN. FANG FENGHUI, Chief of
Staff, People's Liberation Army
(through translator): I had
planned to have a good talk with
you on the South China Sea
issue. However, regardless
of the solemn representations of
the Chinese side, the incident
has created a disharmonious
atmosphere. We are resolute in
our determination and will to
safeguard our sovereignty and
maritime rights.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At a separate
meeting in Malaysia, China's
defense minister told U.S.
Defense
Secretary Ash Carter that
there's a -- quote -- "bottom
line" on challenges to China's
territorial claims.
He didn't elaborate.
GWEN IFILL: The Iraqi politician
who played a key role in
promoting the U.S. invasion
in 2003 has died. State TV
reports Ahmed Chalabi had a
heart attack and passed away in
Baghdad.
After 9/11, the exiled leader
helped persuade officials in the
Bush administration that
Saddam Hussein possessed weapons
of mass destruction. That turned
out to be false. Chalabi later
served as Iraq's deputy prime
minister. He was 71 years old.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Vatican faced
new exposes today in book form
about gross financial
mismanagement.
The Associated Press reported
"Merchants in the Temple" tells
of wasteful spending, outright
greed and entrenched resistance
to Pope Francis' reforms. A
second book, "Avarice," claims
that money from a hospital
foundation went to renovate a
Vatican official's plush
apartment.
GWEN IFILL: Back in this
country, Republican presidential
candidate Donald Trump dismissed
his rivals' complaints about
debate formats and questions
today, but he didn't confirm
reports that his campaign plans
to negotiate its own debate
terms with TV networks. The
billionaire celebrity was asked
about the issue at a news
conference in New York.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate: I will go anywhere
they want. I don't care
too much about the debates.
Look, I'm the one that gets all
the nasty questions anyway.
I like the debates. I think
they're good for me, but we have
to be treated a little bit
fairly.
But, as far as I'm concerned, I
really don't care that much. I
just want to debate. I think
debating is a good thing. It's
healthy. It gets everything into
the open.
GWEN IFILL: Separately, Trump
accused the U.S. Federal Reserve
of keeping interest rates
low at the request of President
Obama. The White House flatly
rejected that claim.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Japan's Takata
Corporation will pay $70 million
in U.S. fines for mishandling
a huge air bag recall. It could
reach a record $200 million if
the company fails to comply
with terms announced today.
Takata now admits that it
delayed recalling more than 20
million
air bag inflators that can
explode with too much force.
GWEN IFILL: The U.S. auto
industry is now on track for a
record year in sales. Most
major automakers saw
double-digit gains last month.
GM led the way with sales up
nearly
16 percent from a year ago.
And on Wall Street, the Dow
Jones industrial average gained
89 points to close at 17918.
The Nasdaq rose nearly 18
points, and the S&P 500 added
more than five.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
from legalizing marijuana to
LGBT rights, voters go to the
polls to decide; the
controversial Keystone pipeline,
is it effectively dead?; the
woman
in charge of the upcoming global
climate change summit, and much
more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The presidential
election may still be a year
away, but a handful of states
voted today to elect state and
local leaders and decide on a
number of important ballot
measures. Issues ranged from the
legalization of marijuana to the
expansion of LGBT protections.
For a look at the big races and
voter initiatives around the
country, we are joined by Reid
Wilson of the Web site and
newsletter Morning Consult.
So, welcome, Reid Wilson.
Let's start out talking about
some of these major ballot
measures around the country,
Ohio looking at legalizing
marijuana, but in a limited way.
Tell us about that one.
REID WILSON, Morning Consult:
Ohio would become fifth state
along with the District of
Columbia
to legalize marijuana for
recreational use, but there is a
little twist here.
As states create new laws about
marijuana, they have to come up
with new regulatory structures.
Nobody has ever regulated
marijuana, because it's always
simply been illegal. So what
Ohio
is thinking of doing is allowing
10 groups, 10 businesses to
control production for the
first four years or so.
It seems a way to sort of
control what makes it to the
market and to sort of demand
some
quality. However, there are a
lot of people who are worried
that they're essentially handing
over monopoly control of a major
industry -- and it is a major
industry -- there are
millions at stake here -- to
just a small handful of people,
including some very wealthy
investors.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, if this
passed, it would set a
precedent. It would be
different.
REID WILSON: Well, every state
that has legalized marijuana has
done so in a slightly different
way. Washington State regulates
it like alcohol. Colorado
regulates it in a sort of
slightly
different way that allows
sellers to grow their own
marijuana.
Everybody is sort of trying to
figure out what's right, what is
the right way to do
these things. The big question
is, what is going to come on the
ballot in 2016? There
are at least 17 states that are
considering some kind of
marijuana legislation or ballot
initiatives, including 10 alone
in the state of California.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you were
telling us that's a way the look
at several of these ballot
measures.
Let's look at -- talk about two
of the city measures. In
Houston, you have voters looking
at nondiscrimination protection
for LGBT individuals. This has
become very controversial, and a
lot of focus on
public restrooms.
REID WILSON: Yes, it has.
And last year, a
nondiscrimination law passed the
city of Houston. This measure,
if it passes
tonight, would repeal that
previous nondiscrimination
measure. And the focus on
restrooms, I think,
sort of hints at the next step
in the fight over gay rights.
The focus on restrooms has
to do with those who
are transgendered.
Now, there's public support for
people -- for nondiscrimination
against those who are
transgendered
has lagged behind public support
for nondiscrimination against
gays and lesbians. So this is a
way
to sort of shift the focus from
a question that opponents of
this nondiscrimination law
would lose to some other element
that they might have a better
pathway to toward a majority
of public opinion.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, again, hotly
controversial there in Houston.
Meanwhile, San Francisco is
looking at an initiative on
Airbnb. This is the company
that helps you rent out a room
in your house, rent out your
apartment. Tell us about that
one.
REID WILSON: Well, what this
legislation would do is, it
would limit the ability of
homeowners
to rent out their apartments on
a short-term basis, their
apartments, their homes,
whatever
room they have to rent. It would
limit it to 75 days a year.
Currently, most homeowners
can rent out their place
for 90 days a year.
So it's just a small little
change. However, it does have to
-- it does sort of speak to
this larger battle between the
traditional economy and the
rising sharing economy. We
have seen big legislative fights
in cities across the country
over Uber, as Uber takes
on the taxi industry. Now we
have got Airbnb taking on the
hotel industry, both of whom
have millions of dollars
at stake in this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, as far as we
know, first time Airbnb has been
on a ballot.
REID WILSON: As far as we know.
JUDY WOODRUFF: OK. So, let's
look at now some of these races.
You have a governor's race,
a contested race in Kentucky.
You have got interesting state
Senate races in Virginia.
Let's look at those.
REID WILSON: So, in 2010 and
2014, one of the sort of
overlooked consequences of the
Republican wave that swept power
in Congress back towards the
Republicans was that it swept
even more power back to
Republicans in state
legislatures.
There are very few Democratic
state legislators in the country
these days, compared to before
the 2010 elections. And in
Kentucky, one of the very few
Democrats who still governs a
Southern state, a usually
Republican state, is
term-limited. So the two
candidates who
are running, Attorney General
Jack Conway, the Democrat, is
probably slightly favored,
but only slightly, over the
Republican businessman Matt
Bevin.
You might remember Matt Bevin's
name. He ran against Mitch
McConnell two years ago -- last
year, rather, in a primary.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Challenged Mitch
McConnell in the last -- right.
REID WILSON: Matt Bevin has run
a very poor race at the moment,
but it's a very heavily
Republican state. What really
matters to the outcome of this
race is what voters are thinking
about when they head into the
polls. Are they thinking about
national issues and President
Obama? His approval rating is
at 34 percent in Kentucky.
Or are they thinking about how
the outgoing governor, Steve
Beshear, the Democrat, has
run the state? His approval
rating is at 59 percent.
Democrats want to focus on
statewide
issues. Republicans want
to focus on the national.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And finally just
a word, Reid Wilson, about those
Senate races in Virginia,
that, right now, both houses in
Virginia are controlled by the
Republicans.
REID WILSON: And the Senate is
only narrowly controlled by
Republicans, just by one seat.
There are about four races that
we're all closely watching, a
couple down near Richmond,
a couple up here in the
Washington suburbs.
This is one of those cases where
Democrats lost so many
legislative seats. They have
a chance to win back a chamber
tonight. It's -- maybe this is a
preview of 2016 and how
Democrats can do that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Governor Terry
McAuliffe doing a lot of pacing
tonight.
REID WILSON: There you go.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, Reid
Wilson giving us a preview of
all those races.
Thank you very much.
REID WILSON: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: The long-running
debate over the Keystone
pipeline has taken another sharp
turn, as the company behind its
construction asked to suspend a
review of its plans, triggering
many questions about whether the
Obama administration is planning
to reject it anyway.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary: Given how long it's
taken, it seems unusual
to me to suggest that somehow
it should be paused yet again.
GWEN IFILL: White House Press
Secretary Josh Earnest expressed
skepticism today over
TransCanada's
abrupt request to suspend the
Keystone application process.
The company said it wants to
wait
for state-level reviews and
litigation to play out. But
Earnest said another motive
may be at work.
JOSH EARNEST: There's no doubt
that this debate has been
heavily influenced by politics,
and
the president is doing his best
to try to shield the actual
process that will consider
the merits of the project
from those politics.
GWEN IFILL: Earnest said the
president still plans to decide
the issue before he leaves
office in early 2017. If
approved, the pipeline would
connect oil sands in Alberta,
Canada,
to refineries along the Gulf
Coast, passing through six U.S.
states. It would carry 800,000
barrels of oil a day.
The application process began in
2008, but a final decision has
been delayed time and
time again. The president has
remained publicly noncommittal
about the project, but in South
Carolina earlier this year, he
offered some pointed criticism.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: We're not going
to authorize a pipeline that
benefits largely a foreign
company, if it can't be shown
that it is safe and if it can't
be shown that, overall, it
wouldn't contribute to climate
change.
GWEN IFILL: In February, the
president also vetoed a
Republican bill to force
construction
of the pipeline. Environmental
groups opposed to Keystone
argued today that TransCanada
is now hoping a president
friendlier to the project will
be elected next year.
Wyoming Senator John Barrasso, a
leading Republican and pipeline
supporter, agreed.
SEN. JOHN BARRASSO (R), Wyoming:
By putting the pause button now,
that allows things to
stay active, in my opinion,
until after the 2016 election,
when we may have a Republican
president in office who can then
approve it. I think the fear
right now is that the president
was getting ready to oppose it
and put a final close-down on
it, and this just keeps it
alive.
GWEN IFILL: For now, the State
Department continues its review
of the project, with
no end date announced.
How much of this latest twist in
the pipeline is driven by
politics, and how much by
policy?
For that, we turn to Juliet
Eilperin, who covers the White
House for The Washington
Post.
And you also cover these
environmental matters, Juliet.
So, we know -- we heard what
Josh Earnest said. The president
is going to decide before
he leaves office, but there's a
long period of time between we
get -- between now and
then. Where do we know, where do
we think, what does your
reporting tell us, that the
administration is
in this process?
JULIET EILPERIN, The Washington
Post: My sense is that the
administration has been debating
whether to give a final decision
in advance of the U.N. climate
negotiations that are
at the end of this month.
There's kind of an argument one
way or another.
You could say that this would
help give added momentum for the
global fight against climate
change, or they could wait until
after this period. The move by
TransCanada is a little
unexpected. It kind of throws
more uncertainty into the
process.
But -- so that's one of the
things they're weighting. But in
terms of -- my sense is
from my reporting that the
review is finished, the
determination is made, and it's
a question
of, when are they going to
announce what they're going to
do?
GWEN IFILL: And the assumption
among many parties is that the
decision that's been made
is against the pipeline.
JULIET EILPERIN: Yes, that's my
sense of where they are, and it
certainly is interesting
to hear again folks, including
Senator Barrasso and others,
saying that they assume that's
where it is and that's one of
the reasons they really would
like this decision delayed,
so that the next president who
could be a Republican could
decide it.
GWEN IFILL: So, what's behind
TransCanada's decision to
request the pulling of the plug?
How would a delay for them
affect the outcome here?
JULIET EILPERIN: Really, the
only question is that it would
give an opportunity to
potentially
make the case before a
different administration.
GWEN IFILL: That's it?
JULIET EILPERIN: Aside from
that, there's no real benefit.
And when you talk to them, they
say that they're not interested
in withdrawing the application,
which would be
ultimately of course...
GWEN IFILL: But they could
do that if they wanted to.
JULIET EILPERIN: They could do
that, but I talked to them just
today, and their spokesman
said they have no interest in
doing that. So, given that, it
seems very unlikely that
they would do that.
GWEN IFILL: And yet a lot of
environmental organizations you
would assume would be dancing
a victory dance today
aren't exactly.
JULIET EILPERIN: Right. No. In
fact, they're nervous about the
idea that this could be
put over to the next
administration, where they don't
have a commitment, particularly,
again, if it ends up
being a Republican.
So, given, when we look at the
lay of the land, if it's a
Democrat, all the Democrats
running right now are opposed to
it. But that's not the case in
the GOP. And so they really
want the president to reject
that so that's done before he
leaves office.
GWEN IFILL: Are they pressuring
the White House at this stage,
or not letting up on
the previous pressure of the
White House to go ahead and make
this decision?
JULIET EILPERIN: They are
pressing very fiercely. All the
groups opposed to it issued
statements
last night when TransCanada
asked for a delay. There was no
variation. They're all saying,
this pipeline needs to be
rejected by President Obama
before he leaves office.
GWEN IFILL: Now, part of
TransCanada's reasoning is that
there are still unresolved
issues,
especially the path of the
pipeline through Nebraska. What
is that challenge and where
does it stand?
JULIET EILPERIN: Right.
It's kind of complicated.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
JULIET EILPERIN: But the easy
way to put it is that they had a
route through Nebraska,
which essentially was thrown out
over procedural grounds stemming
from a lawsuit.
They have detailed three
possible routes, all of which
have been on the table before,
with a couple slight of
alterations. And so a state
commission has to approve that,
and
that process could take
between seven and 12 months.
GWEN IFILL: There's a southern
route that's already approved.
JULIET EILPERIN: Exactly. We're
talking about this upper route,
which is 1,179 miles that
goes to Steele City, Nebraska,
from Hardisty, Alberta.
The connection from Steele City,
Nebraska -- from Steele City
down to the Gulf Coast
was approved by the Obama
administration. The president
went out and talked about this
being a way to increase
accessibility to oil. And so
that's been up and running, and
it's
profitable.
GWEN IFILL: So, in Canada, we
now have the potential of a
different leadership. Stephen
Harper, the former prime
minister, was very much in favor
of this. And now we have Justin
Trudeau. Is there a different
political climate?
JULIET EILPERIN: There's a
slightly different political
climate, although incoming Prime
Minister Trudeau has said that
he's in favor of this pipeline.
That said, when he talked to the
president right after his
reelection, he emphasized
that he thought the relationship
between the U.S. and Canada is
broader than one pipeline
and also talked about the
importance of balancing economic
interests against environmental
priorities.
And so clearly...
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: He's leaving
himself a little room.
JULIET EILPERIN: A little bit
of wiggle room on that front.
GWEN IFILL: Where does the State
Department -- what role does the
State Department play
in this decision process between
now and the end of the
president's term?
JULIET EILPERIN: They need to
issue a national interest
determination to essentially say
whether or not this cross-border
permit is justified on the basis
of the U.S. national
interest, which is a
very broad issue.
At that point, the president
could intervene if he wanted to
or not. So, at this point,
it is seen that whatever the
State Department does, it would
be in concert with the White
House. And you wouldn't have --
it would seem quite unlikely
that they'd issue something
and then the president
would do something.
GWEN IFILL: So that's the next
shoe we're waiting to see drop.
JULIET EILPERIN: Waiting
to hear that drop.
GWEN IFILL: Juliet Eilperin of
The Washington Post, thank you.
JULIET EILPERIN:
Thank you, Gwen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
dams, the problem or solution in
a drought-stricken state;
teenagers'
screen time spikes to nine hours
a day; and author John Irving
reveals his creative process.
JOHN IRVING, Author, "Avenue of
Mysteries": I always get endings
first. I can't tell you
why, but I do. There is a sense
that I always have as a writer
that my endings are always
predetermined for me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, first, in
just a few weeks, countries from
around the world will meet
in Paris to try to reach a new
agreement on limiting or
reducing greenhouse gas
emissions.
But prior climate summits have
often hit a wall over
disagreements about economics,
development
and what should be
the ultimate goals.
As the Paris conference nears,
Jeffrey Brown explores the
prospects ahead.
JEFFREY BROWN: Last year marked
the warmest for the planet since
records were first kept,
lending new urgency to calls
from scientists and many leaders
for slowing greenhouse gas
emissions.
To that end, the Paris summit
could present a major
opportunity -- a key goal, find
a
way to slow the rise in global
temperatures to about two
degrees Celsius or by the end
of the century.
President Obama, who traveled to
Alaska this summer to show the
effects of warming, has
made it a central focus of his
second term, including new
limits on carbon dioxide
emissions
from power plants. In recent
months, China, India and the
European Union have all
announced
long-term plans.
But a similar conference in
Copenhagen six years ago failed
to reach a deal. And there
are questions about whether
voluntary commitments will work
this time, and also continued
political
opposition here and abroad.
Christiana Figueres is the
U.N.'s point person in charge of
the Paris summit. I sat down
with her in Washington
earlier today.
Christiana Figueres,
welcome to you.
CHRISTIANA FIGUERES, Executive
Secretary, United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate
Change: Thank you, Jeff.
JEFFREY BROWN: Let me start with
the big question, six years ago
in Copenhagen widely seen as
a failure. Now Paris.
Have things changed?
CHRISTIANA FIGUERES: Well, you
know, I have often said that
Copenhagen was the most
successful
failure of the United Nations,
because we learned an awful lot
from Copenhagen. But,
yes, things have changed.
JEFFREY BROWN: Is that
good spin? Or is that...
CHRISTIANA FIGUERES: No, no, no,
no, no, no. Truly, we made
actually a very in-depth study
of everything that went wrong in
Copenhagen, so that we could
learn. So, it's not just
spin. It truly is the case.
But, you know, in addition to
the way that we handle
conferences nowadays, in
addition
to that, what has changed
dramatically is the context in
which this meeting in Paris
is going to take place, for many
different reasons, technology
perhaps being one of the
very salient differences, where
we had before -- it wasn't
really sure whether renewable
energies would be able to
compete with fossil fuel.
But, today, we have the answer.
Yes, they are already competing.
So, you know, technology
is definitely much better.
Finance is already beginning to
flow. We already have $2.6
trillion
that's already moving into green
technology. The policy...
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: OK, but let me
stop you on finances then,
because I want to get to some
of the continuing
problems you face.
The pledge by industrial
countries to help poorer
countries with $100 billion a
year,
that part hasn't happened.
CHRISTIANA FIGUERES: It is a
pledge to help developing
countries with $100 billion by
2020.
A (INAUDIBLE) report that was
just launched a couple of weeks
ago shows that, in 2013,
the flow was at $51 billion. In
2014, the flow was at $62
billion. And we don't have
the numbers for 2015, obviously
not also for next year, but
there is already a trend going
up, and hence a very good
possibility that we will be able
to -- that they will be able
to get to $100 billion.
Those numbers that I quote have
not been accepted by developing
countries because there still
has to be a discussion about
methodologies, definitions and
assumptions. But, order of
magnitude, it shows that we're
moving certainly in the right
direction.
JEFFREY BROWN: Political will,
you think, is more there than it
was?
CHRISTIANA FIGUERES: Political
will is definitely there.
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: Where do you see
that? Give me an example. Where
do you see that?
CHRISTIANA FIGUERES: Well,
that's very simple.
All you have to do is take a
look at the 157 national climate
change plans that we have
already received and counting,
because we will receive more
before Paris, so 157 different
countries, every single one of
the industrialized countries,
every one, and over 100 other
countries
who have already put in writing
and in public what they're going
to do to contribute both
to bringing emissions down, as
well as to making their
infrastructure more resilient.
JEFFREY BROWN: Most of that
nonbinding agreements from these
countries.
A lot of experts continue to
question that. Circumstances
change. Politics change. How
do you know that
they stick to it?
CHRISTIANA FIGUERES: Well, first
of all, I don't know of anything
binding that is actually
a guarantee.
The Kyoto Protocol is the best
example of that, because we had
countries adopt the Kyoto
Protocol and then not ratify. We
had countries adopt, ratify and
then still not comply. So,
you know, even if it's legally
binding, that's not a guarantee.
And I think one of the major --
going back to your first
question, sort of the major,
major shift that we had between
where we were in Copenhagen and
now is that countries have
increasingly understood that
addressing climate change is not
just a global issue. It is
actually
also a national priority. It is
national development
opportunity.
So, they're no longer seeing
themselves as having to choose
between what is important
to them nationally and how they
can contribute globally. But,
rather, they're beginning to
see the coincidence of these.
That, to me, is a much more
compelling driving force,
because
countries will operate
in their own interests.
JEFFREY BROWN: Going into this
conference, one of the huge
goals, major goal, holding
the warming to two degrees
Celsius, already declared
unreachable, according to your
analysis.
CHRISTIANA FIGUERES: The sum
total of all of those climate
change plans make a huge
dent in both the growth of
emissions that would have
projected without those climate
change plan, and certainly in
the corresponding temperature.
So, without those climate change
plans, we would have been where
we were in Copenhagen,
for example, moving into a
scenario of a world that would
have warmed four, five, six
degrees
centigrade. Today, with these
climate change plans, assuming
that they're implemented,
and we can talk about that,
we're moving into a world that,
currently, with the current
level of effort, would warm
somewhere between 2.7 to three
degrees.
A major improvement.
Is it enough? No.
JEFFREY BROWN: No, a huge
dent, but not enough.
CHRISTIANA FIGUERES: Not enough,
which is why Paris is not just
going to be the receiving
vessel for those climate change
plans as currently being
planned, but, rather, it will
understand
that that is the floor of global
effort and certainly not the
ceiling.
JEFFREY BROWN: You talk about
the political will being there,
but continued skepticism
from many quarters in this
country, in Congress.
We're, of course, now in a
presidential campaign again,
where you hear about opposition
to
making changes in the economy,
in policy for climate change.
You are still facing that.
CHRISTIANA FIGUERES: Yes.
But what I see is an increasing
support on the part of certainly
the private sector,
as well as different subnational
governments, whether they are
state or city level, for
President Obama's
Clean Power Plan.
But, more importantly than that,
more importantly, let us
remember that this is not the
first
time that this country has
grappled with the question of,
do we stay bound in an operating
mode that has been prevalent in
the past, or do we move toward
something completely
new?
It is not the first time. And if
you look at the history of the
United States last century,
this century, it is a very tough
call. But the U.S., as every
other country, eventually
does make the right choice, and
there is only one right choice
to make. And I am very confident
that this country will make
the right choice, clearly.
JEFFREY BROWN: Christiana
Figueres, thank you very much.
CHRISTIANA FIGUERES: Thank you
very much for the invitation.
GWEN IFILL: A storm swept across
California's Bay Area yesterday.
But the inch of rain it
brought with it is scant relief
for a state that's experiencing
one of the worst droughts
on record.
One potential solution, building
more reservoirs to store
unpredictable rainfall, which
could
mean more dams.
"NewsHour" special correspondent
Spencer Michels reports on the
viability of such a proposal
and the consequences
for the Golden State.
SPENCER MICHELS: It may be the
sign of a hopeful farmer: a
biplane spreading fertilizer on
a dry field in California's
Central Valley. There's no
irrigation in this part of the
valley, so, for now, rain is the
only way these crops will grow,
and there hasn't been
much of that for the
last four years.
And the reservoirs, like Folsom
Lake near Sacramento, that
normally fill the canals
and make the crops bloom, are
depleted. Folsom is just 17
percent full.
TIM QUINN, Executive Director,
Association of California Water
Agencies: It's flat-out
empty because of this drought.
SPENCER MICHELS: Tim Quinn is
executive director of the
Association of California Water
Agencies.
And what's the solution to
this, build another reservoir?
TIM QUINN: Well, if we'd had
more water going into storage,
we could still have more left
than we have got today.
SPENCER MICHELS: And that's
important, says Quinn, not just
to Californians.
TIM QUINN: We're a big part of
this economy. And we provide
food to the nation and to the
world.
SPENCER MICHELS: Quinn and many
in state government want a
comprehensive solution,
including conservation.
TIM QUINN: We do need to build
more dams, but we also need to
connect them with more
underground storage.
SPENCER MICHELS: But building
new dams goes against a recent
trend in some states, including
Washington, of actually
demolishing dams, mostly for
environmental reasons like
protecting
fish and restoring
wildlife habitat.
These days in California, the
mood is quite different. Since
the gold rush, building dams
and canals has been California's
answer to unpredictable rain and
snowfall. To get the
water from where it falls in the
mountains hundreds of miles away
to the dry farms and
populated areas, Californians
have constructed more than 1,400
dams, including Shasta Dam
on the Sacramento River.
In 1968, the state dedicated
Oroville Dam, tallest dam in the
country, and sent water
south to farms and cities. For
many farmers and those whose
livelihoods are tied to farming,
the success of those dams is a
key to what needs to happen now.
Grant Garland is vice president
of Bar ALE, a livestock and
poultry feed mill in Williams,
California.
GRANT GARLAND, Vice President,
Bar ALE: We could solve the
problem fairly easily by
building
something like the equivalent of
five more lake Orovilles, where
we'd have plenty of
water to store, and we'd have
hydroelectric power for both
agricultural or urban and
industrial
purposes, and for the
environment as well.
SPENCER MICHELS: That sentiment
is echoed in radio ads playing
in ag communities in
the Central Valley
and on the Internet.
NARRATOR: But the solution
is more dam storage.
RON STORK, Friends of the River:
People are frustrated. They
don't have as much water
as they want. And they want to
be able to do something with
somebody else's money.
SPENCER MICHELS: Ron Stork is
policy director for Friends of
the River, an environmental
group.
RON STORK: When you do the
arithmetic, the big dams that
are being proposed right now
wouldn't add more than 1 percent
to California's developed water
supply. The real solution
is to recognize that you can't
develop much more water.
SPENCER MICHELS: Stork and other
environmentalists like
University of California fish
biologist
Peter Moyle, allege that dams
have created major problems in
rivers for the native fish
population, especially
in the drought.
PETER MOYLE, University of
California: You get these severe
problems, the environment
always seems to lose.
SPENCER MICHELS: More dams, he
says, will exacerbate the
situation, especially for
salmon.
PETER MOYLE: There are many
places where the flows below the
dams are simply not adequate
to support big
populations of salmon.
SPENCER MICHELS: Besides, Moyle
says, new dams don't make
economic sense.
PETER MOYLE: Essentially, all
the good dam sites are taken. So
whatever dams you build
to try to increase storage,
you're really picking at the
fringes.
SPENCER MICHELS: Nevertheless, a
year ago, spurred on by the
drought, Californians approved
a $7.5 billion water bond that
requires spending $2.7 billion
on water storage. Several
projects
are vying for that money,
including a plan to raise Shasta
Dam by 18 feet, even though
the present lake rarely fills.
Another project would add a
second dam and reservoir behind
Friant Dam near Fresno on
a river that largely is depleted
of water, most of it channeled
to San Joaquin Valley
farmers. Some politicians want
to remove federal protections
from the mostly wild and
free-flowing
Merced River, below Yosemite
National Park, so a reservoir
can be enlarged.
There's almost no disagreement,
especially during the drought,
that California needs
more water storage. But building
new dams and reservoirs,
especially in a state that
has every major river already
dammed, strikes some people as a
waste of money, a lot of
money.
One proposal is to take this
valley and flood it under 350
feet of water, with a big dam
at the other end.
MARY WELLS, California Resident:
It's a very bittersweet
situation. I don't want to lose
my home of 40-some years.
SPENCER MICHELS: Mary Wells
lives in the hamlet of Sites,
which would be inundated by the
reservoir. But most of her
farmlands are beyond the
proposed lake.
MARY WELLS: We all ultimately
look on the other side of these
hills, and that's where
our livelihood is, the almond
trees, the rice fields. They all
need water. And if I'm to
sustain the business I have
created as a fifth-generation
farming family, we have got to
have additional
water.
Good morning.
SPENCER MICHELS: Wells raises
cattle, and grows hay, almonds
and rice on land beyond
the reservoir site, most of it
irrigated. She has served on
various water boards, and
has advocated for decades to dam
her valley and develop more
water, even though private
landowners, like her, who
benefit will have to pay for at
least half.
MARY WELLS: The reality of it is
that the days of totally
government-financed, be it
federal or state, building of
dams is long over. We are using
the highest and best use
for that water, and we therefore
need to pay for that water.
SPENCER MICHELS: But not
everyone agrees that supplying
farms and new plantings of
almonds
are the best use for the water.
Jim Brobeck, a water policy
analyst for AquAlliance in
nearby Chico, says the state
should encourage
more unirrigated land.
JIM BROBECK, AquAlliance:
California really needs to put a
moratorium on the expansion
of irrigated agriculture on land
that is currently being used
successfully as ranch land.
California has already
overextended its water-based
agriculture. And grazing is a
very suitable
use for the land up there.
SPENCER MICHELS: Besides, he
says, the cost of Sites'
reservoir, as much as $4
billion,
could make the price
of water prohibitive.
JIM BROBECK: This water will
never be affordable by farmers,
who need very inexpensive water.
SPENCER MICHELS: As the state
continues to grow, keeping up
with the demand for water
will remain contentious. The
water bond money will be
allocated some time next year.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Spencer Michels in California's
Central Valley.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Most of us are
spending more time with screens
than ever before, from TV
and computers, to the
smartphones we carry in our
pockets.
A new report on media use by
teens and tweens shows that may
be even more true for children.
The survey of 2,600 kids between
the ages of 8 and 18 paints a
picture of constant connection.
Children between 8 and 12
reported spending an average of
four-and-a-half-hours a day
using a screen, and nearly six
hours consuming media of any
kind.
Among teenagers, average screen
time was more than
six-and-a-half-hours a day and
almost
nine hours with media overall.
Those totals don't count
educational uses in school or
for homework.
Joining me now to dig into the
findings is James Steyer. He is
the CEO of Common Sense
Media. It's a nonprofit
children's advocacy and media
rating organization that is
behind
today's report.
Welcome to the "NewsHour,"
James Steyer.
So, just remind us. Your
organization looks at how young
people use media.
JAMES STEYER, Founder and CEO,
Common Sense Media: That's
right, and how it affects their
lives, how it affects them in
school. And then we advocate on
behalf of kids in schools
across the country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So you did this
survey. We said 2,600 people 8
to 18.
JAMES STEYER: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What
were the main findings?
JAMES STEYER: Well, the sheer
volume. I mean, the opening that
you just did, Judy, nine
hours a day on average is what
teenagers spend with media and
technology.
I mean, think about it. That's
way more than they spend with
their parents, with teachers,
even more time than
they spend sleeping.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sleeping.
JAMES STEYER: The number-one
activity in their life now is
media and technology.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what did --
and you made a distinction
between, again, what, the tweens
-- this is the 8- to
12-year-olds -- are doing vs.
teenagers.
JAMES STEYER: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How are they
spending that time? What are
they doing?
JAMES STEYER: Well, first of
all, there is no one archetype.
There is no one-size-fits-all
kid.
And so you have kids on social
media, watching TV, listening to
music, even reading books,
remember them, and then doing
different forms of media, but
the bottom line is the sheer
volume of time that kids spend
today means that they have a
24/7 reality with media and
technology that's shaping their
lives in so my many ways.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you found, I
saw, that a lot of what they're
doing is multitasking.
They're listening to music while
they doing their homework or
watching videos while they're
doing something else.
JAMES STEYER: Right.
And the truth, as a parent of
four kids who actually
multitask, against their
parents'
advice, you cannot multitask and
concentrate on your homework.
But two-thirds of the teenagers
that were surveyed say that they
continue to multitask, meaning
they're on Facebook
or Instagram or texting their
friends, while they're doing
their homework.
They're supposed to be reading
Shakespeare, but they're texting
their friends.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But we start to
hear that their brains are wired
differently? And they are
able to do some multitasking.
So, what's the answer about
that?
JAMES STEYER: Well, the truth is
multitasking really doesn't
work. It's a myth.
Some of my colleagues at
Stanford University did a major
study on this a couple of years
ago, and showed that you simply
can't have two conversations at
once and you can't concentrate
on more than one thing well.
Think about how important
homework it is to concentrate on
information.
So, the multitasking finding in
this study has very big
implications for schools, and
also for parents giving
guidance to their kids.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What are the
implications, and how much do
parents know? You asked these
teenagers and tweens how much do
their parents know about what
they're doing. What did they
say?
JAMES STEYER: And you know what
they said? They don't know very
much.
Of course, we didn't grow up
with these devices. That's a big
part of it. But, also, I think
that one of the things that we
really see from this study is
that parents need to look
in the mirror. You have got to
look at your own behavior. If
you're glued to your cell
phone all the time, if you're
bringing your devices to the
dining room table or to the
restaurant and you're not having
conversations with your kids
when you're present with them
because you're too busy with
your e-mail or your text
messages, what example are you
setting?
So I think this report, while it
displays this remarkable impact
of media and technology
on kids, also sends a clear
message to parents about their
own behavior.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about to
schools? What can schools,
teachers, educators do? What
should they think about?
JAMES STEYER: Well, I think,
first and foremost, every kid in
this society needs to learn
digital
literacy and citizenship, the
safe, smart, ethical use of
digital devices. We all hear
about cyber-bullying and privacy
violations and really
not-so-good stuff that happens
on media and
technology platforms.
So, schools need to teach this
just like they taught driver's
ed or sex ed. It's a basic
part of life today. And I think
the second thing they can do if
you look at multitasking
is teach kids, you can't do your
homework while you're also
Facebooking your friends.
And you need to concentrate.
Now, this is an ongoing
challenge. But I actually think
that the report is a message to
everybody
in this country about we have to
recognize that this is a reality
that our kids are living
in. But there's something we can
all do to make sure it's a
positive reality for our
kids.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But how much of
this is made harder, James
Steyer, by the fact that so
much of it is out of sight of
parents or any other adult in
that child's life, because
it is on a device, so much of
it, that others can't see?
JAMES STEYER: That's right.
That's a great question, Judy,
because in the old days, we used
to talk about no TV
in the bedroom, no video game
machine in the bedroom. Well,
with your teenagers, you have
got to tell them you can't take
your cell phone to bed. By the
way, it really interferes
with sleep.
So, you have to have very
different rules, but I actually
think it's important for parents
to understand that phones get in
the way of sleep. They stimulate
the brain. You should
have a place not in the bedroom
and not in the dining room where
devices can be parked.
And I do think we're literally
having to set new rules of the
road for families and for
young people across the country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: If parents are
out there watching this, and
teens themselves and educators,
where do they go to -- is there
a set of rules to follow, or
should every family try to
figure
this out for themselves?
JAMES STEYER: I think
there are a set of rules.
Shamelessly, I will say, look,
Common Sense Media is a large
organization that gives out
tips and tools to everybody. But
I think that every school in
this country should be teaching
the basics of digital
citizenship to parents and to
kids. It's as important to
educate
parents about it
as it is to kids.
I think there are rules out
there, and they're not that
complicated. It's basic common
sense.
You need to put the device away
at times. You need to remember
that the most important
conversations you ever
have are face to face.
But, in the long run, the genie
is out of the bottle. This
world's here to stay, so
we have to set new rules for
our kids and for ourselves.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And maybe
sometimes take that device away
from your child?
JAMES STEYER: Absolutely.
(LAUGHTER)
JAMES STEYER: I mean, Judy, it's
not -- by the way, if they're a
teenager, that's a pretty
hard thing to do.
But, absolutely, you should do
that. Media and technology are a
privilege, not a right,
and that is part of parenting.
You have to take the device
away. I'm sorry to tell you
that, but every parent,
including the Steyer family,
needs to do that, and yours as
well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank
you for the advice.
(LAUGHTER)
JAMES STEYER: James Steyer,
Common Sense Media.
Parenting is evolving.
JAMES STEYER: It sure is.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you.
JAMES STEYER: Good
to see you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: A poor child who
sorts garbage in Mexico grows up
to become a prominent American
writer. How did that happen?
The new novel "Avenue of
Mysteries" takes us through a
life that includes a host of
other vivid characters, events
and places. Its author is
himself a prominent American
novelist, John Irving, whose
books include "The World
According to Garp," "Cider House
Rules," "A Prayer for Owen
Meany," and other bestsellers.
He joined Jeffrey Brown for our
"NewsHour" Bookshelf
conversation.
JEFFREY BROWN: John
Irving, welcome to you.
JOHN IRVING, Author, "Avenue
of Mysteries": Thank you.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, the story of
a writer, he's named Juan Diego,
in your head -- we
meet him old and new. In your
head, did you see him first as
an older man or as a young
boy?
JOHN IRVING: I saw him first as
a child and an adolescent. I saw
him as a dump kid, an
orphan
JEFFREY BROWN: Literally, a dump
kid, we should say, right? He
works...
JOHN IRVING: Yes, yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
JOHN IRVING: They're called nino
de la basura, children of the
rubbish. And it's still true
today, as it was in 1970, that
the children are the workers in
the dump who do the sorting
and separating of the
stuff that's there.
JEFFREY BROWN: And so the
"Avenue of Mysteries is the
specific story of this man, Juan
Diego,
but also how -- in a sense,
how we become who we are.
JOHN IRVING: Yes.
It wouldn't be the first time
for me that the focus of a novel
begins at that threshold
age in early adolescence, when
an adolescent is becoming an
adult, or a child is becoming
an adolescent. I have always
believed that, in a story, if
something traumatic or
calamitous
enough happens to a kid at a
formative age, that will make
him or her the adult they
become.
JEFFREY BROWN: In this case, the
kid, he is the dump -- he works
in a dump, but he picks
up books, right? And he learns
to read, he teaches himself to
read, he teaches himself
languages.
Did that interest you, that sort
of book as a way into a larger
life?
JOHN IRVING: Oh, very much. It
was the perfect connection to
the Jesuits' interest in him.
Given the high priority the
Jesuits have always put on
education, the fact that there
was
a kid who taught himself to
read, the dump reader, they call
him, they were more inclined
to think that he could be one of
their children, in their
orphanage, because he was so
teachable
that he had already
taught himself.
JEFFREY BROWN: There's also -- I
mean, there are many vivid
characters in here; one is
his sister, Lupe, right, who is
clairvoyant, knows what's on
people's minds. That, of course,
allows you to have this mix of
realism, real realism, right, in
the dump, but also a sense
of magic.
JOHN IRVING: Yes.
This is the third time I have
been tempted to bring a
character into a novel who is
partially
informed of what I always know.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: You're smiling
as you say that, right?
JOHN IRVING: Well, because I
always get endings first. I
can't tell you why, but I do.
There is a sense of -- that I
always have as a writer that my
endings are predetermined
for me, and this is now the
third time that I have given
some part of that gift -- it's
a dubious gift, if you are a
child, especially, and you bear
the burden of it -- giving the
character at least the
conviction that he or she knows
what's going to happen.
It's a burden for those
characters, especially if
they're young and innocent in
other ways.
Well, Lupe has -- she has these
two ancestors in earlier novels.
But when a character like
that happens to me, a clear
repetition of a character I have
invented before, I'm not
even aware of the repetition
until it's too late to turn
back. It's already there.
JEFFREY BROWN: But you, the
author, are clairvoyant in that
sense, right? And you have
famously
said you write backwards. You
know the ending of these
stories?
JOHN IRVING: I do. I'm not
proselytizing my method. I don't
believe that one writer should
tell other writers how to write.
It's just long been my habit,
when I'm thinking about a novel,
when the characters begin to
form, when the story begins to
emerge, I always know more about
the ending, even the aftermath
to the ending, than I know about
the beginning. And so there's a
construction that works from
back to front.
I don't begin a novel until I
have written, not just the last
sentence, but usually, as
a result thereof, many of the
surrounding final paragraphs, so
that in addition to knowing
what happens, I know what the
voice is. I know how
melancholic, or not. I know how
I
sound when I'm telling
the story at the end.
JEFFREY BROWN: This story is
notably about an author in older
age, looking back, filling
in that story.
JOHN IRVING: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, the -- I
suppose the requisite question
is about whether you are,
yourself,
in retrospective mode, and
thinking about how one becomes
an author, a novelist.
JOHN IRVING: I think, in earlier
novels, the main characters who
were writers were exactly
as you say. They were an attempt
on my part to understand my own
origins.
But, in this case, I feel that
because of what happens to Juan
Diego as an older man,
he would almost have to be a
writer in order to live as much
in his imagination as he does.
I don't want to say so much that
I give the story away, but I'm
not so sure that -- if
this character weren't a fiction
writer, if -- I'm not so sure
that he would get in quite
as much trouble as he does.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: And
that interested you?
JOHN IRVING: It did. It did.
I'm a worst-case scenario
person. I'm only interested in a
story because I kind of go,
like a magnet, to the worst
thing that can happen.
JEFFREY BROWN: And, hopefully,
the reader will want to come
along, right?
JOHN IRVING: Yes. Yes. Yes.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: The novel
is "Avenue of Mysteries."
John Irving, thanks so much.
JOHN IRVING: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online: The aroma of a freshly
brewed cup of coffee can
strike a punch to your senses
just when you need it. But what
is it about coffee's scent
that makes it so sublime in the
morning? We visited the newly
opened Museum of Food and
Drink in New York City to learn
a little about the smells and
flavors that make us fall in
love with the things
we eat and drink.
Learn more on our home
page, PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: On "Frontline"
tonight: an investigation with
ProPublica into the unsolved
murders
of a string of
Vietnamese-American journalists
in cities across the U.S. in the
1980s. "Terror
in Little Saigon" focuses on an
anti-communist organization
called The Front -- its goal,
to restart the Vietnam War, in
part by using a secret
assassination squad to target
the
journalists who
disagreed with them.
That's tonight on
most PBS stations.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And tonight on
"Charlie Rose": FCC Chairman Tom
Wheeler on net neutrality,
media mergers and the upcoming
auction of television airwaves.
GWEN IFILL: And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Wednesday, actor Jeff Daniels
at home on screen, stage and in
his native Michigan.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow evening. For all
of us at the "PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.